Sun Community Source License Principles

by Richard P. Gabriel and William N. Joy

Executive Summary

   Community Source creates a community of widely available software
   source code just as does the Open Source model, but with two
   significant differences requested by our licensees, as follows:
     * compatibility among deployed versions of the software is required
       and enforced through testing
     * proprietary modifications and extensions including performance
       improvements are allowed

   These important differences and other details make Community Source a
   powerful combination of the best of the proprietary licensing and the
   more contemporary open source technology licensing models.
     _________________________________________________________________

   In the contemporary world of Internet business, the traditional
   principles of overly protective software ownership don't make as much
   sense as they used to. Today it is difficult for a single company to
   house all the expertise it needs to succeed. Especially when a company
   wishes to build infrastructure on which other businesses depend, it
   cannot presume to know how best to do that right out of the chute. The
   theory of separation of concerns and modularity work well once the
   dividing lines are known, but finding those lines is a collaborative
   effort, requiring cooperation between companies.

   As business practice has matured in the Internet world, it has become
   clear that there is good reason to expect that companies will be able
   to know when to cooperate, and so it makes sense to look at how to
   license software to take advantage of this emerging understanding.

   The Sun Community Source License (SCSL) is designed to balance the
   needs of organizations needing to innovate rapidly in order to grow
   with the needs of those organizations to leverage a community's
   expertise while maintaining proprietary advantages.

Historical Perspective

   In the recent past there have been two alternative approaches to
   software licensing: traditional proprietary licensing and Open Source
   licensing. Open Source licensing is relatively new, being preceded by
   shareware and free software.

Proprietary Licensing

   Proprietary licensing recognizes primarily binary use licenses which
   restrict software to execute-only formats, and only those who have
   bought a license are entitled to use the software. In some cases, the
   source to the code is available at extra charge and only for limited
   purposes. In this model, the value of the software is assumed to be
   contained entirely within that software, and as such, it is to be
   protected as dearly as any other company asset. Such a model has
   several advantages, as follows:

     * It provides protection for intellectual property.
     * It guarantees structured innovation, which is innovation that is
       planned within a single responsible organization.
     * It is clear who owns what.

   On the other hand, proprietary licensing has a number of disadvantages
   revealed by the pace of Internet business, as follows:

     * Innovation and releases are scheduled, and the schedule may be ill
       timed for companies that depend on the software. Further, even
       when a schedule is acceptable for dependent companies, schedules
       can slip.
     * Binary-only products are classical black boxes, and the problem
       with a black box in an emerging sector is that the wrong things
       might be in the black box: code with a wrong performance profile,
       improper resource utilization, or over- or under-generalization.
     * The quality of the software depends entirely on the owner
       organization; this can be a problem if the owner organization does
       not place the same value on quality as the using organization, the
       owner organization has a different perspective on quality, or if
       quality resources are not allocated in ways that the using
       organization needs.

   In short, the benefits naturally fall out of the observation that
   proprietary software is completely black box, and that when the
   boundaries of the black box are optimally placed, the benefits are
   clear and effective. But if those boundaries are ill-placed or
   releases are ill-timed, the result is frustration and lost
   opportunities.

Open Source Licensing

   Open Source licensing recognizes that different organizations have
   different concerns, and therefore the source code is freely available
   for any party to do what it will. Open Source licensing grew out of
   the tradition of shareware and free software, which were movements
   that embodied political beliefs about what can and cannot be owned.

   Open Source licensing, on the other hand, does not embody beliefs
   about ownership aside from recognizing the fact that some
   organizations wish to own software and others don't. However, Open
   Source licensing does recognize that certain common elements - for
   example, infrastructure - are important for a number of parties and
   that those elements should be freely and openly available.

   With Open Source licensing, the source code is available for any use,
   but there are incentives to "give back" to the Open Source community
   those improvements that are for the common good. Most importantly, the
   Open Source approach recognizes that the primary value of a piece of
   software is the expertise represented by the people who developed it.
   Thus, even when source is out in the open, the value still remains
   with those who can expertly manipulate it.

   Such a model has several advantages, as follows:
     * The code is open with published and, often, specified interfaces.
     * There are more developers looking and working on the common source
       code, so there is higher quality and more-rapid innovation.
     * There is no central owning organization that sets schedules and
       priorities that might conflict with a using organization's
       schedules and priorities.
     * There is a self-organizing effect in which the boundaries between
       proprietary concerns and community concerns are adaptively set.
     * A participating organization can reap the benefits of expertise
       not in its employ.

   There are disadvantages as well, as follows:
     * There is no clear control over compatibility issues and there may,
       therefore, be fragmentation.
     * There may be no responsible organization. Bugs introduced by
       another organization may be too difficult for a using organization
       to fix and of too low priority for the author to fix in a timely
       manner.
     * Progress can be chaotic and undirected.
     * There are limited financial incentives for improvements and
       innovations, leading commercial developers to use the proprietary
       model.

Community Source License

   The Community Source licensing model takes the advantages from each of
   the proprietary and Open Source models and eliminates the
   disadvantages.

   In Community Source licensing there is a community of common interests
   centered around an infrastructure which is provided by a particular
   organization, called the developing organization. A group of other
   organizations may join the community, and generally those
   organizations will have an interest in building businesses around the
   infrastructure.

   For example, JiniTM connection technology licensing is based on a
   community of companies who wish to build and sell devices employing
   Jini technology. Sun Microsystems is the developing organization which
   invented, designed, and built the initial Jini technology
   infrastructure. This infrastructure is network based and provides a
   mechanism for devices and software services to gather into a
   spontaneous network of capabilities.

   The community comprises those who have agreed to the license, and
   within this community there is a mostly Open Source model of
   interaction. However, because the members of the community are bound
   by a common license, intellectual property is maintained and there is
   no requirement to share openly everything developed for the
   infrastructure. Moreover, the community comprises only those who have
   agreed to the license, not the general public.

   Three levels of participation in the license can be supported, as
   follows:
     * Research Use, which is not only for real research - for example,
       to improve the infrastructure - but for evaluating the technology
       and prototyping potential products.
     * Internal Deployment, which is both for (very) limited distribution
       and for testing before launching a product.
     * Commercial Use, which is for selling products.

Principles

   The following summarizes the principles behind the design of the Sun
   Community Source License.

   Immediate, Open Access
   In order to encourage members to join the community defined by the
   license, there is an easy and risk-free way for a company to get
   access to the infrastructure source code. Any company or developer can
   become a Research Use licensee with a simple click-through license
   which grants broad experimentation and evaluation rights. The licensee
   may use the source code and its specifications in any way whatsoever
   short of deployment.

   With a Research Use license, a developer may take any approach to
   using the source code in order to determine whether the technology can
   be of use; in fact, the developer can do all the work leading up to
   deployment with such a license.

   The license and source code are available through the Net, and so the
   transition from interest to participation is immediate. Access is
   clearly open.

   Increased Innovation
   In order to increase the rate of innovation, improvements and
   additions to the original source code may be incorporated into the
   source code regardless of where they come from. There are two basic
   types of source code improvements that can be made: improvements to
   the core technology and improvements or additions to surrounding
   technology. With Jini connection technology, for instance, there is
   the basic infrastructure and there are services. Each sort of service
   - storage services, for example - will have common elements which can
   be improved by community efforts. In this case, acceptable
   modifications and additions are determined by the subcommunity of
   organizations who are working in that area using an open process. In
   such cases it is expected that change can be very rapid, and indeed,
   must be in order to gain widespread agreement and deployment.

   With infrastructure modifications and additions, change is expected to
   be less rapid because the base of organizations that depend on that
   infrastructure is large. However, because developers at organizations
   with different requirements are working with the core technology, over
   time it is expected that situations will arise that the original
   developers did not anticipate. These outside developers are able to
   evolve the technology for their products and markets more rapidly than
   the original developers would ordinarily be able to do using a
   traditional proprietary license.

   In short, there is a spectrum from the innermost portions of the
   infrastructure where change should be slow and deliberate to the
   outermost portions - which might represent applications - where change
   should be as rapid as the market requires.

   Increased Work Force
   In order to increase the effective work force, participation is not
   limited: Any organization can participate in the Research Use License
   without paying or negotiation.

   Increased Quality
   Simply stated, with more eyes looking at the code, there is more
   chance that errors will be caught and repaired, particularly when that
   code is used in situations and contexts not anticipated by the
   original developers and researchers. It might be thought that with an
   Open-source type of model there would be increased likelihood of
   errors in code, but the Open Source experience is largely the opposite
   - that because the source is published, developers are generally very
   careful while developing code in order to avoid public embarrassment.

   Moreover, the test code is also covered by the license, and the
   benefits of a larger community working accrue to the test suite as
   well as to the target technology.

   Faster Commercialization
   The Internal Deployment License makes the transition to commercial use
   easy. Once the technology has been evaluated and adapted through the
   Research License it can be deployed internally by conforming to the
   related test suites and specifications. In some cases we expect that
   Internal Deployment will be allowed without a fee, as it is for the
   core of the Jini connection technology. The Internal Deployment
   License is made available with the Research Use License, which means
   it is also immediate and easy.

   The Commercial License is tailored to provide a dependable platform
   for all third parties and to provide revenues to the developing
   organization, which can be used to fund both support for the entire
   community of licensees and also further development.

   Access to Students
   Researchers, teachers, and their students are particularly attuned to
   using technology at its limits, and therefore such people are
   especially encouraged to participate by special conditions of the
   SCSL. It is easy to use the source code in laboratories and in the
   classroom.

   Protection for Intellectual Property
   Licensees rightly enter into the community expecting that their
   intellectual property rights will be respected. Therefore it is not
   required that a participant give up intellectual property rights when
   joining the community. In order that the community remain open,
   however, the SCSL does require that any programming interfaces which
   extend the platform or infrastructure technology be open and
   specified, even while implementations and intellectual property
   embedded in the implementations may be held proprietary.

The Best of Both Worlds

   The Sun Community Source License blends the best aspects of the
   proprietary and Open Source license models. The SCSL was designed to
   support a developing organization and a surrounding community of
   participants. The developing organization is generally building an
   infrastructure that will spawn a number of new marketplaces or
   business opportunities for the community of participants. The
   developing organization might itself act also as an ordinary
   participant in the community if, for example, that organization
   desires to take advantage of a new marketplace or business
   opportunity. Nevertheless, the two roles are separated in the SCSL.
   The developing organization deserves to reap some benefits for
   developing the infrastructure, and the SCSL recognizes that.

   The following lists the benefits of the SCSL that are shared with or
   derived from the proprietary model:

     * It provides protection for intellectual property.
       While error corrections to the licensed technology must be given
       back to the community, other modifications can remain proprietary
       at the discretion of the participating organization that created
       them.
     * It guarantees structured innovation within a single responsible
       organization.
       The developing organization is responsible for the original code
       base and the community is responsible for the contributed
       portions. Ultimately, the developing organization is responsible
       for the entire source code base including moving it forward.
     * It is clear who owns what.
       The infrastructure part of the original code and upgrades to it
       are owned by the developing organization and shared with the
       community. Error corrections are required to be given back to the
       community by all licensees. Community members may contribute
       shared modifications to the community, granting rights to the
       community to use these modifications, including intellectual
       property, specifications, and test suites.
       Licensees may make modifications, such as performance enhancements
       or platform adaptations which are compatible with the licensed
       technology, or make extensions - these modifications and
       extensions may be kept proprietary, though extensions are required
       to have open interfaces.
     * There is clear control over compatibility.
       For the infrastructure part of the original code and upgrades to
       it, the developing organization provides specifications and test
       suites. These test suites must be passed by all internally
       distributed code. Commercial distributions have an additional
       requirement to use relatively recent upgraded code and pass these
       test suites, so that the platform can evolve.
       For extensions, the community member making the extension is
       required to supply specifications and, ultimately, test suites.

   In some cases neither a test suite nor a good specification may be
   good enough to guarantee that a modification, extension, or bug fix is
   compatible. For some purposes a reference implementation can provide
   not only a base on which to build a commercial version of a specified
   piece of functionality but a guide to ensure correctness. Although the
   SCSL does not mention reference implementations per se, reference
   implementations as part of a process of defining and accepting
   specifications for interfaces, for example, are compatible with the
   SCSL principles and philosophy.

   Benefits SCSL shares with or are dervied from the Open Source model
   are as follows:

     * The platform is open with published and specified interfaces.
       The SCSL recognizes the strong community interest in an open
       platform. A primary mechanism for extension within the community
       is publishing the specifications for new and often layered
       interfaces. These interfaces may be best - or in rare cases, only
       - implemented by using proprietary techniques and technology; this
       is permitted, but under the SCSL, the programming interfaces
       themselves and related specifications and test suites must be
       open.
     * There are more developers looking and working on the common source
       code, so there is higher quality and more-rapid innovation.
       The community pulls organizations and developers into a circle of
       shared concerns, and this community can effectively self-organize
       with only a little assistance from the developing organization.
     * There is no central owning organization that sets schedules and
       priorities that might conflict with a using organization's
       schedules and priorities.
       Though there is a schedule for the developing organization's
       structured innovation, the SCSL provides every participant with
       all the freedom and authority to move forward independently.
     * There is a self-organizing effect in which the boundaries between
       proprietary concerns and community concerns are adaptively set.
       There is a force tending to keep the infrastructure stable because
       all the participants depend on it, but innovation can take place
       any place in the technology base. The binding requirements of the
       SCSL such as openness and compatibility also tend to keep the
       infrastructure stable by preventing predatory modifications and
       extensions.
       There is also a spectrum of concerns from the developing
       organization's point of view that ranges from extensions of high
       importance to those of less importance; by initiating work for
       those high importance items itself, the developing organization
       can exert beneficial stability on them.
     * A participating organization can reap the benefits of expertise
       not in its employ.
       There is no limit on who can participate.

   Additional benefits to the SCSL are as follows:

     * Proprietary modifications including performance improvements are
       allowed.
       Unlike the proprietary licensing model, all community members can
       make such changes to the original source base (or upgrades to it)
       because they have access to it. Unlike the Open Source model, such
       changes are not required to be given back to the community, though
       it is encouraged. (Note however, that error corrections to the
       original source code base must always be returned to the
       community.)
     * Innovation and releases are not subject to a centrally planned
       schedule.
       Each participating organization may innovate or release at any
       time with any combination of private and community sources. In
       order to ensure that other independent releases are compatible, a
       conformance suite must be passed before release, and published
       specifications must be respected. For simplicity, any necessary
       testing and certification can be performed by the releasing
       participant.
     * The quality of the software can be improved throughout the
       community.
       Each participant can determine appropriate quality levels and work
       toward them independent of any other participant or in conjunction
       with others.
     * Progress is always made on the original source base, and progress
       on the peripheries depends on participant needs.
       The original source base is fully the responsibility of the
       developing organization which can move that base forward; the
       community may participate in those activities, accelerating them
       as necessary. Because commercial users of the technology are
       required to update to newer base technology in new products, after
       a reasonable delay, the platform can evolve.
       As interest builds in creating related technologies, those parts
       can move ahead at their own pace.
     * There is a place for both incremental improvment and reward for
       invention.
       Not only does the developing organization have sufficient
       motivation to invent and innovate but for participating community
       members there are incentives to invent in the marketplace and
       protections for those inventions within the community. That is, by
       creating a more protected community than a completely public one,
       there can be protections tuned to encourage and safeguard
       innovation and invention within that community.

Effects

   In the last few years there have been remarkable changes in the
   computer industry largely spurred by the Internet, the Web, and by
   alternative forms of business. For the first time we have seen
   business strategies based on giving away products as rapidly as
   possible, we've seen Open Source gain a large measure of success, and
   we've seen collaboration where common interests play a stronge role.

   There are many benefits to the sort of license the Community Source
   License represents. The following sections talk about them a bit.

Increased Commitment

   One of the difficulties of trying to get a new infrastructure
   technology adopted is the sense that a proprietary standard might not
   make it or that a competitive situation will make choosing it
   difficult or impossible. Regardless of who the sponsoring company is,
   there is a risk associated with not knowing everything.

   Because participants in the Community Source License have access to
   the source code and can reasonably expect that their innovations will
   appear in that source, those participants can see everything there is
   to see about the technology. By being part of a community of partners,
   the risk of putting all one's eggs in a single company's basket is
   reduced. The SCSL creates a context in which commitment is less risky,
   and the more participants there are, the less risky it is.

Closer Ties Between Development Groups

   Developers have always gotten together at conferences and coffee
   houses, and when they do they are very good at two things: exchanging
   useful information in the form of techniques and know-how, and not
   revealing secrets. When developers get together within the community
   created by the SCSL, they are able to speak freely about particular
   issues represented by the shared source code. Thus, beneficial
   information exchange can take place more rapidly, and each
   participating organization benefits - because writing software is
   hard.

Rapid Spread of Influence

   Because it is so easy for a participant to join the community and
   because there is a shared commitment to the technology once
   participants are fully engaged, the underlying infrastructure is
   spread more rapidly. And because there are more development groups
   pushing up both the innovation and quality, the new marketplace based
   on the infrastructure is created more rapidly than it would any other
   way.

Reduced Risk for Adopters

   Frequently, black-box technology products pose too great a risk for
   many organizations because those organizations end up depending on
   another company for the development, maintenance, and evolution of
   parts of their own products. Most importantly, the priorities the
   owner company would assign to work related to the technology are not
   necessarily priorities a customer would choose. With SCSL, the
   participants share common source code and can set their own
   priorities, working as much or as little on the code as they wish.

   Those organizations that require more infrastructure can take it from
   a platform provider as usual just as some organizations prefer to buy
   from Red Hat rather than getting Linux from an ftp site.

The Future

   In writers' workshops, in design charrettes, in code reviews and
   walkthroughs, and in artists' studios there is one common theme: By
   working within a community, a better result is achieved than working
   alone - even virtuosos learned by criticism and sharing. And if you
   talk to almost any artist or software developer, you will hear that
   what they are doing is a "work in progress."

   In defining the Sun Community Source License, Sun has tried very hard
   to get it right, but maybe it isn't perfect. Naturally, we believe so
   much in our open process that the license itself is subject to that
   same process, and as participants need changes in the license, we will
   make them.

   Right now, in the context of an industry rapidly changing, it's our
   best attempt - it's a work in progress.

