How to Get Support
------------------

One of the most irritating things about any programming book is when you 
find that bit of code you’ve just spent an hour typing simply doesn’t work.  
You check it a hundred times to see if you’ve set it up correctly, and 
then you notice the spelling mistake in the variable name on the book page.  
Of course, you can blame the authors for not taking enough care and testing 
the code, the editors for not doing their job properly, or the proofreaders 
for not being eagle-eyed enough, but this doesn’t get around the fact that 
mistakes do happen.

We try hard to ensure no mistakes sneak out into the real world, but we 
can’t promise that this book is 100% error free.  What we can do is offer 
the next best thing, by providing you with immediate support and feedback 
from experts who have worked on the book and try to ensure that future 
editions eliminate these gremlins.

If you wish to directly query a problem in the book with somebody who knows 
the book in detail then e-mail support@wrox.com, with the title of the 
book, the last four numbers of the ISBN and where possible the relevant 
page number in the subject field of the e-mail.

Your message is delivered to one of our support staff who are the first 
people to read it. We have files on the most frequently asked questions and 
will answer anything generally immediately. We answer general questions 
about the book and the web site. 

Deeper queries are forwarded to the technical editor responsible for that 
book. They have experience with the programming language or particular 
product and are able to answer detailed technical questions on the subject. 
Once an issue has been resolved, if necessary the editor can post the errata 
to the web site. 

Finally, in the unlikely event that the editor can't answer your problem, 
he/she will forward the request to the author.  We try to protect the author 
from any distractions from writing.  However, we are quite happy to forward 
specific book related requests to them.  All Wrox authors help with the 
support on their books.  They will either directly mail the customer with the 
answer, or will send their response to the editor or the support department 
who will then pass it on to the reader.

How To Tell Us Exactly What You Think
-------------------------------------

We always value hearing from our readers, as this is the only way in which 
we can find out what we are doing right as well as wrong.

You might want to tell us how much you liked or loathed the book in question.  
Or you might have ideas about how this whole process could be improved, in 
which case you should e-mail feedback@wrox.com.  We are committed to achieving 
high standards of editing and reviewing on all our books, and we assess our 
editorial process on an ongoing basis - we'll take your comments into account, 
and will consider them in future editorial decisions.  You can also be assured 
that every person working for Wrox, will see and have chance to discuss your 
comments, in a concerted effort to improve our future titles and performance.

Phil Perks (philp@wrox.com)
Technical Support Manager